on June 18th, 2023, which [music] was a
Sunday, Father's Day.
Hardp Singh Nijar was leaving his temple
at the end of the day.
There was a car that got ahead of Mr. N
[music] Jar's truck, forcing him to
stop. Two men approached him from the
left side.
>> The killing of a man outside.
>> They found Nger inside a pickup truck
[music] with gunshot wounds where he
died of his injuries.
>> Make no mistake, this is a political
assassination. Around the same time,
there was according to US prosecutors a
murder for hire plot unfolding in New
York City against one of Hardep Sign
Nijar's close friends. [music]
>> The only thing I knew at that time is
that my life is in danger
>> and the governments of the US of Canada
concluded that the murder of Mr. Nijar
and the targeting of [music] Mr. Panun
were initiated by people in some way
connected to the government of India
which was angered by their involvement
in something known as the Kalistan
movement. The campaign [music] for the
seek religion to have an independent
homeland in Punjab in northwest India.
India has said allegations it was
involved in Nijar's killing are absurd.
It has sought the extradition and arrest
[music] of some seek separatists due to
what it says are links to terrorism. The
issue is not about freedom of expression
but advocating violence and legitimizing
terrorism.
>> People in the seek campaign for
independence around the world do have a
habit of turning up dead.
>> Baramit Singh Panchar was shot dead.
>> UK based SEK [music] campaigner has died
in the early hours of this morning.
>> Police say the killing of a man outside
a [music] sick temple Sunday night
appears to have been targeted. There
were these strange or suspicious deaths,
threats against others in the wider seek
community, and what [music] US
authorities say was this murder for hire
plot in New York against this other
activist by an alleged gangster.
The obvious question is, are they all
related? And if this goes higher, how
high does this go?
Hardep Singh Nijar was a campaigner for
the creation of an independent seek
state in Punjab, a hypothetical nation
[music] that advocates call Kalistan.
India designated him a terrorist and
accused him of being the chief of a
banned militant group responsible for
violence in Punjab.
But Canadian police found no evidence he
was involved in terrorism.
>> We have also conveyed our firm rejection
of the so-called Kalistthan referendum
and the politically motivated exercises
by extremist elements.
>> That night, Nidar's Dodge Ram pickup was
blocked by another car as he tried to
leave the parking lot.
>> The vehicle quickly moves and you
[music] see two individuals come out.
At that moment, two gunmen came running
toward him. They opened fire on Nijar's
truck, shooting him more than 30 times.
>> I opened the door and tried to check on
his pulse, but he's not breathing at
all.
>> The gunman fled on foot into a nearby
park [music] where witnesses pursued
them.
>> The chase is just continuing through
here.
>> On the other side of the park, a silver
Toyota Camry was waiting. They got in
and drove off.
>> People were angry, frustrated. They
[music] didn't know what to do. So there
was a suggestion that I speak to the
crowd and the first thing that came out
of my mouth was make no mistake this is
a political assassination and India is
behind it.
At first advisers to Canadian Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau were told it was
unlikely that the murder was politically
motivated.
>> But as rumors of India's alleged role
grew, they requested a new assessment.
We want to make it clear that we
understand as a community that uh the
assassination
was committed by Indian agencies.
>> Canadian investigations would ultimately
find evidence of a wider campaign
against seek activists and that Nijar
wasn't the only alleged target.
India has never claimed responsibility
for targeting seek dissident and
dismissed allegations that it was
involved with Nijar's killing as absurd.
>> The Indian [music] government has never
admitted involvement with the killing of
Mr. Nar. Prime Minister Modi has been
very open about the fact that India
believes it has the right [music] to act
and to kill those it considers
terrorists.
Modi has made this clear when talking
about Pakistan like in the speech from
2024.
Though a minority of 25 million seeks
have played a major role in Indian
history. After the 1947 partition
fractured their homeland of Punjab, a
radical faction turned to terrorism.
Their tactics from indiscriminate
shootings of civilians to the
desecration of Hindu temples escalated
communal tensions. India accused
Pakistan of fueling the violence by
supplying militants with weapons and
[music] training.
The crisis peaked in 1984 when a group
of these separatists fortified
themselves within the Golden Temple, the
holiest seek site. In response, the
Indian government launched Operation
Blue Star to flush out the militants.
>> I don't think we could have done
anything else. Some people feel we
should have acted earlier
and some that we should not have acted.
>> There was a complete state collapse at
this juncture [music] which then led to
this hasty and poorly executed
operation. According to official
figures, around 575 people died, but
seek groups put the total much higher.
The 1984 [music]
attack really spurred into motion the
idea of Kalistthan, not only in Punjab,
but in the diaspora as well.
>> Later the same year, Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two of
her seek bodyguards in retaliation.
[music]
The anti-seek riots that followed killed
thousands and drove many seeks [music]
to immigrate to the UK, US and Canada
where they became an important political
constituency.
Blueest star and the riots thereafter.
These were the two factors that were the
most significant mobilizers for the
amplification or escalation of the
Kalistthan movement and remain one of
the most important elements [music] in
the ideologicallydriven segment of the
Kalistani diaspora.
In the years following the riots,
[music] seek extremists conducted fatal
attacks across India, including bomb
blasts and [music] shootings.
But the deadliest one occurred overseas.
>> Air India flight 182 left Toronto and
Montreal last night, bound for London
and India. It never made it.
>> 329 people were killed in the bombing.
Canadian authorities determined that
seek militants living in [music] their
country were responsible. But the
suspected perpetrators largely avoided
jail time after [music] a series of
botched investigations.
>> One person was given a short sentence
which he did not serve in full. All the
conspirators went scot-free. There's a
very long history over here which
justifies Indian grievances.
In the late 1990s and 2000s, the
Kalistan movement became less visible in
Punjab. Sikhs became increasingly
represented in Indian politics with
Manmoan Singh serving as prime minister
from 2004 to 2014.
>> Today you would have to dig very deep in
Punjab to find a Kalistani.
>> But abroad the movement never died out
and it was reinvigorated by a new
generation of activists. Just as
Narendra Modi Singh's successor took a
more aggressive stance towards disscent,
>> we have currently in power a party which
seeks to demonize certain segments of
the population to create a perpetual
threat to the Hindu majority. So the
Islamists are going to overrun India.
The Kalistanis are going to overrun
India. Now this is a discourse that is
sought to be harnessed to their
electoral ends. They're playing with
fire really and they're doing it
cynically.
>> India frequently demanded the
extradition of Kalistan campaigners who
had accused of crimes but was rebuffed.
Its battle with [music] them soon
entered a new phase not in India but on
the streets of western cities.
In the spring of 2023, Kistan activists
began dying in unusual circumstances.
One was a man named Paramjit Singh
Pandoir who was gunned down in Pakistan.
India had designated him a terrorist and
accused him of leading a banned militant
group. Then there was Avdar Sinconda who
Indian media portrayed as a pro-Calistan
militant.
>> Kanda who lived in the UK went into
hospital and died within just a few
days.
>> Police found no signs of foul play. Just
3 days after Kanda died, Mr. Nijar was
killed.
There are a number of countries that
have carried out assassinations
overseas, overtly or covertly. Israel
famously does this with some frequency.
There were American drone strikes going
on in places like Somalia, in Pakistan.
So the argument that you do hear from
people in government in India is well we
are a superpower now. We are one of the
big boys and that means that if you
think someone is an enemy of your
country you can take action against that
person.
I used to go to the gym. I used to go
and have dinners. I used to go to the
cafes and sit there and work. Now I have
a full protection team that brings me
from the place of my residence to
wherever I go.
>> Katachan Singh Panoon is a lawyer in
Queens. [music]
He's been in the US for 20some years.
>> The Indian government declared Panoon a
terrorist due to his Kalistan advocacy
and what India said was involvement in
violence and incitement.
But to American authorities, he was an
activist protected by the First
Amendment.
In the spring of [music] 2023, someone
was following Panoon. They took photos
of him. Each image included GPS data
showing exactly where he was.
>> A man named [music] Nikil Gupta, who
according to US authorities was kind of
a medium-time hustler, drug dealer,
weapons trafficker, was asked to
organize the killing of Mr. Panon here
in New York City.
>> Gupta was facing a criminal
investigation in India. [music] He had
allegedly been offered a deal by an
intelligence agent.
According to a US indictment, if Gupta
arranged [music] Panoon's murder using
contacts in New York, the case against
him would disappear.
Around the same time, Canadian
authorities were investigating the Nijar
assassination.
[music] In late July 2023, there was a
breakthrough in the case. The UK, one of
Canada's partners in the Five Eyes
Intelligence Alliance, had obtained some
relevant information.
The British intelligence would only be
shared under [music] strict conditions.
It would be handd delivered to Ottawa
and kept off electronic systems, and
only a handful of Canadian officials
preapproved by London [music] could see
it.
The file was a summary of conversations
intercepted by a British intelligence
agency [music] between individuals who
analysts believed were working on behalf
of the Indian government. They had
[music] discussed three potential
targets, Nijar, Kanda [music] and Panu.
Later there was an exchange about how
Nijar had been successfully eliminated.
There were several meetings between
senior people in the Canadian government
and their Indian counterparts in which
the Canadians were saying repeatedly,
"We would like to set up a joint
inquiry, some kind of off-ramp."
Essentially, those offers were refused.
>> When the Canadian media picked up on the
story, Trudeau decided to go public.
Canadian security agencies have been
actively pursuing credible allegations
of a potential link between agents of
the government of India and the killing
of a Canadian citizen Hardep Singh
Nijar.
>> India reacted furiously dismissing the
allegations as absurd. Relations between
the two countries entered a crisis.
Meanwhile, other Kalistan activists like
Panoon were wondering if they could be
next.
>> At the beginning of this, allegedly, Mr.
Gupta reached out to a contact of his in
New York and said, "I need help getting
someone killed." That contact at Mr.
Gupta's instigation allegedly then
introduced him to someone who Mr. Gupta
understood to be a contract killer.
But fortunately for Panoon, neither man
was really who Gupta thought. The
contact who Gupta had allegedly reached
out to was a source for the US Drug
Enforcement Administration or DEA. And
the contract killer that the DEA source
introduced to Gupta was actually an
undercover New York City police officer.
>> So from this point on, this is an
undercover operation and every bit of it
is wired. So all of the WhatsApp
messages that Mr. Mr. Gupta sent to his
source. There are voice calls, an
in-person meeting. All of this ends up
in evidence and is going to be at the
core of the criminal trial of Mr. Gupta.
When Panoon was followed, he wasn't in
immediate danger. The people taking
pictures of him were law enforcement
personnel staging the surveillance to
send the images to Gupta. These were
pictures of Panoon going about his daily
life in Queens with a timestamp and GPS
coordinates embedded in them to say,
"Look, he's really here at [music] this
time. We have eyes on him." But this was
all ruse.
>> But the question for the DEA was how
serious was Gupta?
[music]
>> In early June 2023, Gupta allegedly told
the undercover hitman that a parcel was
about [music] to be delivered.
That day, a delivery was made in
Manhattan. $15,000 in cash given to the
supposed contract killer.
>> After money had actually changed hands,
which is what takes it from just talk to
something much more serious, the DEA,
the FBI began making plans to arrest
Gupta.
>> Gupta's New York contact persuaded him
to meet in Prague. And as soon as he
arrived, Czech police arrested him at
the request of the DEA.
>> His phones [music] were taken. The data
from those phones gets extracted. This
then creates this huge trove of
information and you could see the number
for [music] this person who Gupta had
been talking to who he'd saved the
contact in his phone as Amanat, but they
don't necessarily know who this Ammonat
is. They ran the information across
various federal databases and they got a
hit. On an Indian flight attendants US
visa application, a number matching
Gupta's handler was listed. It belonged
to her husband, a man named Vikash
Yadav. And further investigation
uncovered who Yadav was, an employee of
India's main foreign intelligence
agency, the research and analysis wing
[music] or RAW. So you can imagine when
these pieces started to fall into place,
US prosecutors, the DEA, the FBI, and
ultimately the White House were pretty
alarmed to find [music] out that this
had allegedly been directed by someone
working for Indian intelligence.
>> The Biden administration had been
investing heavily in its relationship
with India. Unlike Canada, it didn't go
public, choosing to handle the matter
behind closed doors. American [music]
prosecutors eventually indicted both
Gupta and Yadav on murder for higher
charges. [music]
But only Gupta, who has pleaded not
guilty, is going on trial in New York.
Yadav remains in India safe from US
extradition requests.
So we have two trials coming up. the
trial of Nikil Gupta who has been
extradited from the Czech Republic to
the US and the trial of the four men
charged with the murder of Hardup Signar
>> in Canada after an extensive
investigation involving surveillance
footage and cell tower data. Four men
were arrested and charged in [music] May
2024.
All of them were Indian nationals in
their 20s living temporarily in Canada.
They now face trial for first-degree
murder and conspiracy to commit murder
and have yet to enter police.
>> They were pretty clearly in the view of
investigators, people who were paid to
do this job, [music] not people who had
a specific animus against Mr. Nar.
>> But while some of the alleged
perpetrators may be convicted, the
question of who ultimately ordered these
attacks remains unanswered.
Canadian officials allege Amit Sha,
considered the number two in the Modi
government, is behind a campaign of
violence and intimidation targeting sick
separatists in this country.
The names that [music] have come up as
potentially involved or having been
aware and encouraging of these
operations are Ahmed Sha the home
minister of India who is a very close
ally of prime minister Modi a real
hardliner and Sam Goell who at the time
was the head of the research and [music]
analysis wing India's main foreign
intelligence agency.
India has dismissed the allegations
against Amit Sha as baseless and
rejected claims it was involved in the
Nijar killing. However, when faced with
the US indictment in the Panoon case, it
promised an investigation suggesting
rogue operatives might have been
responsible.
>> If this has been done by India, it has
been authorized at a reasonably high
level. Who has authorized it? I don't
know. And we have not seen definitive
evidence.
>> India continues to seek the arrest of
Kalistan activists around the world.
>> There is a vast intentional exaggeration
of the actual threat [music] and that is
feeding into a increasingly widespread
perception that the movement is
regaining momentum.
That's dangerous because this is a
country with a lot of political turmoil
at this juncture and you don't know
which spark is going to light the
prairie fire.
Both Canada and the US are in new phases
of their relationship with India.
Prime Minister Mark Carney is trying
cautiously to rebuild ties. Meanwhile,
President Donald Trump has imposed steep
[music] tariffs. But a fundamental
reality hasn't changed.
>> I would [music] say two years later that
the effect of these events on India's
international relationships has been
very modest. Whether you are the US, the
UK, Australia, France, Germany, [music]
you have serious concerns certainly
about what appears to be transnational
repression of enemies of the Indian
government living in Europe, living in
North America. But you also have a lot
of reasons to [music]
keep this relationship on track to
pursue trade deals [music] to pursue
security arrangements. India is just too
important. And this is actually a
vindication of some of what you hear
from people [music] in India about these
cases which is well the US assassinates
people, other countries assassinate
people. [music] If we are going to be in
the club of global superpowers, we can
do it too.
>> [music]
[music]